

- **Proposition** (statement) - A declarative sentence that is either true or false, but not both. 
	- A statement is **atomic** if it cannot be divided into smaller statements, otherwise it is called **molecular**.



- A **well-formed formula** (WFF, formula)
	1. Any atomic statement is a WFF
	2. Any WFF preceded by $¬$ is a WFF
	3. Any two WFFs can be made into another WFF by writing one of these symbols between them, $∧, ∨, →, ↔$ and enclosing the result in parentheses
	4. Nothing else is a WFF

- A **well-formed formula** is a finite sequence of symbols from a finite alphabet that is part of a formal language and validly constructed from the rules of that language. 





- A formula of a formal language is a **valid** formula if and only if it is true under every possible interpretation of the language. (In [[Propositional Logic]], they are tautologies.)

- **Alphabet** $\Sigma$ is a finite, nonempty set of elements called **symbols** (or **letters**)
- A **string** (or **word**) over an alphabet is a finite sequence of symbols from that alphabet, usually written next to one another and not separated by commas
	- Empty string (empty word) - $\epsilon$ or $\lambda$
- The set of all possible words over an alphabet $\Sigma$ is denoted by $\Sigma^*$
- The **length** of a string $w$, written $|w|$, is the number of symbols that it contains.

> [!notation] 
> $a, b, c, ...$ for symbols, and $u, v, w,$ ... for string names

> In some applications, especially in logic, the **alphabet** is also known as the **vocabulary** and **words** are known as **formulas** or **sentences**; this breaks the letter/word metaphor and replaces it by a word/sentence metaphor.


- We say that $w$ **derives** $z$ (or that $z$ is **derived** from $w$), and denote $w\Rightarrow{z}$.
- If $w_{1}\Rightarrow w_{2}\Rightarrow\dots\Rightarrow w_{n}$, we say that $w_1$ derives $w_n$ and write $w_{1}\overset{*}{\Rightarrow}{w_{n}}$
	- The $∗$ indicates that an unspecified number of steps (including zero) can be taken to derive $w_n$ from $w_1$

# Formal Language

- Let $G = (V, T, S, P)$ be a grammar. $L(G)=\set{w\in T^{*}:S\overset{*}{\Rightarrow}w}$ is the language generated by $G$.

- We say that two grammars $G_{1}$ and $G_{2}$ are **equivalent** if they generate the same language, that is, if $L(G_{1}) = L(G_{2})$


- If $w\in L(G)$, then the sequence $S\Rightarrow{w_{1}}\Rightarrow{w_{2}}\Rightarrow\dots\Rightarrow{w_{n}}\Rightarrow{w}$ is a **derivation** of the sentence $w$. The strings $S, w_{1}, w_{2}, \dots, w_n,$ which contain variables as well as terminals, are called **sentential forms** of the derivation.


- Formal language #todo  choose good definition!!!
	- A **formal language** can be identified with the set of formulas in the language.
	- A **formal language** $L$ is a possibly infinite set of strings over a finite alphabet $\Sigma$
	- A formal language is a language that is defined by a formal system.
	- Formal language, which is a set of well-formed formulas, which are strings of symbols from an alphabet, formed by a formal grammar (consisting of production rules or formation rules).
	- A **formal language** over an alphabet $\Sigma$ is a set of words over $\Sigma$. 
	- A **formal language** over $\Sigma$ is a subset of $\Sigma^*$

> The adjective *formal* is often omitted as redundant


- A language $L$ is said to be **context-free** if and only if there is a context-free grammar $G$ such that $L=L(G)$

- A **formal theory** is a set of sentences expressed in a formal language
- A **formal theory** is an axiomatic system (usually formulated within model theory) that describes a set of sentences that is closed under logical implication

- regular language #todo  choose good definition!!!
	- A **regular language** over $\Sigma$ is a formal language over $\Sigma$ which is accepted by some DFA.
	- A language is called a **regular language** if some finite automaton recognizes it.

# Formal grammar

-  #todo  (Grammar) $\set{V_{T}, V_N , S, R}$, where $V_T$ is the set of terminal elements, $V_N$ is the set of non-terminals, $S$ is a member of $V_N$, and $R$ is a finite set of rules

- A **formal grammar** describes how to form strings from an alphabet of a formal language that are valid according to the language's syntax
- A **formal grammar** is defined as a set of production rules for such strings in a formal language.
- A **formal grammar** (consisting of production rules or formation rules).


- The rules that specify when we can replace a string from $\Sigma^*$, the set of all strings of elements in the alphabet, with another string are called **the productions of the grammar**

## (Type-0) Unrestricted Grammar


- An **unrestricted grammar** (aka: phrase structure grammar, semi-Thue) is a formal grammar $\displaystyle {\textstyle G=(N,T,P,S)}$, where
	- $\displaystyle N$ is a finite set of non-terminal symbols (or variables)
	- $\displaystyle T$ is a finite set of terminal symbols with $\displaystyle N$ and $\displaystyle T$ disjoint,
	- $\displaystyle P$ is a finite set of production rules of the form $\displaystyle \alpha \to \beta$ , where $\displaystyle \alpha$ and $\displaystyle \beta$ are strings of symbols in $\Sigma=\displaystyle N\cup T$, and $\displaystyle \alpha$ is not the empty string
	- $\displaystyle S\in N$ is a specially designated start symbol


> As the name implies, there are no real restrictions on the types of production rules that unrestricted grammars can have.

## (Type-1) Context-sensitive Grammar (CSG)

- A **context-sensitive grammar** is a formal grammar in which the left-hand sides and right-hand sides of any production rules may be surrounded by a context of terminal and nonterminal symbols. 

## (Type-2) Context-Free Grammar (CFG)

- Type-2 grammars generate the context-free languages.

- A grammar $G = (V, T, S, P)$ is said to be **context-free** if all productions in $P$ have the form $A → x$, where $A \in V$ and $x\in(V \cup T)^∗$
	- $V$ - **Non-Terminals** (variables) 
		- symbolized by uppercase $A,B,\dots$
		- $V$ is a finite set
		- Every element in $V$ is called a **nonterminal character** or a **variable**
		- Variables are also sometimes called syntactic categories. 
		- Each variable defines a sub-language of the language defined by $G$.
	- $T$ (also symbolized by $\Sigma$) - **Terminals**
		- Terminals symbolized by lowercase $a,b,\dots$
		- $T$ is a finite set of **terminals**, disjoint from $V$, which make up the actual content of the sentence. The set of terminals is the alphabet of the language defined by the grammar $G$.
	- $P$ (also symbolized by a $R$) is a finite relation in $\displaystyle V\times (V\cup T )^{*}$, where the asterisk represents the Kleene star operation. 
		- The members of $P$ are called or the **productions rule** (or rewrite rules) of the grammar 
	- $S$ is the **start** variable (or start symbol), used to represent the whole sentence (or program). It must be an element of $V$.



- A derivation is said to be **leftmost** if in each step the leftmost variable in the sentential form is replaced. If in each step the rightmost variable is replaced, we call the derivation **rightmost**.

- A context-free grammar $G$ is said to be **ambiguous** if there exists some $w∈L(G)$ that has at least two distinct derivation trees. Alternatively, ambiguity implies the existence of two or more leftmost or rightmost derivations.
- A context-free grammar is in **Chomsky normal form** (CNF) if every rule is of the form $A\to BC$,  $A\to \alpha$, or $S\to \epsilon$. for some variable $A∈V$, some terminal symbol $\alpha∈Σ$, and some variables $B,C∈V∖{S}$.

- Any production of a context-free grammar of the form $A → λ$ is called a λ-**production**. Any variable $A$ for which the derivation $A \overset{*}⇒ λ$ is possible is called **nullable**.
- Any production of a context-free grammar of the form $A → B$, where $A, B ∈ V$ , is called a **unit-production**.




- THEOREM - Any context-free language is generated by a context-free grammar in Chomsky normal form.





## Regular (Type-3) grammars



